## [Basic Controllers](https://laravel.com/docs/11.x/controllers#basic-controllers)
To quickly generate a new controller, you may run the ==make:controller== Artisan command. By default, all of the controllers for your application are stored in the `app/Http/Controllers` directory:

```
php artisan make:controller UserController
```

Let's take a look at an example of a basic controller. A controller may have any number of public methods which will respond to incoming HTTP requests:

```
<?php 

namespace App\Http\Controllers; 
use App\Models\User;use Illuminate\View\View; 

class UserController extends Controller{   

/**     
* Show the profile for a given user.     
*/    

	public function show(string $id): View{        
		return view('user.profile', [            
		'user' => User::findOrFail($id)]);    
	}
}
```

Once you have written a controller class and method, you may define a route to the controller method like so:

```
use App\Http\Controllers\UserController; 
Route::get('/user/{id}', [UserController::class, 'show']);
```

When an incoming request matches the specified route URI, the `show` method on the `App\Http\Controllers\UserController` class will be invoked and the route parameters will be passed to the method.


## [Resource Controllers](https://laravel.com/docs/11.x/controllers#resource-controllers)

If you think of each Eloquent model in your application as a "resource", it is typical to perform the same sets of actions against each resource in your application. For example, imagine your application contains a `Photo` model and a `Movie` model. It is likely that users can create, read, update, or delete these resources.

Because of this common use case, Laravel resource routing assigns the typical create, read, update, and delete ("CRUD") routes to a controller with a single line of code. To get started, we can use the `make:controller` Artisan command's `--resource` option to quickly create a controller to handle these actions:

```
php artisan make:controller PhotoController --resource
```

This command will generate a controller at `app/Http/Controllers/PhotoController.php`. The controller will contain a method for each of the available resource operations. Next, you may register a resource route that points to the controller:

```
use App\Http\Controllers\PhotoController; 

Route::resource('photos', PhotoController::class);
```

This single route declaration creates multiple routes to handle a variety of actions on the resource. The generated controller will already have methods stubbed for each of these actions. Remember, you can always get a quick overview of your application's routes by running the `route:list` Artisan command.

If you don't need to generate all seven resourceful  routes Laravel does have an extension.
To generate the resource for all actions except edit you could do this..
```
Route::resource('photos', PhotoController::class,[
	'except' => ['edit']
]);
```

To only create an index and a show you could do this..

```
Route::resource('photos', PhotoController::class,[
	'only' => ['index', 'show']
]);
```

